Judge Tries To Find Cause Of Car Crash Fatal to Diana.
By CRAIG R. WHITNEY.
Published: June 6, 1998.
PARIS, June 5 Nine months after the car crash that killed Diana, the Princess of Wales, and her companion, Emad Mohamed al-Fayed, a French investigator today questioned photographers who pursued the couple, relatives of the dead and witnesses to try to determine how it happened. 
The investigator, Judge Herve Stephan, is trying to determine whether nine photographers and a motorcyclist arrested at the scene of the accident last Aug. 31 may have somehow caused the driver of the couple's Mercedes to lose control and crash into a tunnel support pillar at high speed. 
The driver, Henri Paul, acting security chief of the Ritz Hotel, owned by Mr. Fayed's father, Mohamed al-Fayed, also died in the crash.
The French authorities later determined that he was legally drunk at the time of the accident and had been taking antidepressant drugs. 
Judge Stephan convened the senior Mr. Fayed, Diana's mother, Frances Shand Kydd, the photographers and a battery of lawyers this morning in the bidding room of the medieval Palace of Justice, a chamber normally used to auction seized goods, for a virtual reconstruction of the accident. 
The sole survivor of the crash, Trevor Rees-Jones, a bodyguard who worked for the Fayeds, did not attend. 
''The immorality, the inhumanity of what they did,'' Mr. Fayed said of the photographers during a break in the proceedings outside the palace, on the Ile de la Cite, near Notre Dame.
''If I was not in a courtroom, I would hang them all.
They were like vultures around the bodies.'' 
Mrs. Shand Kydd did not speak to reporters.
''She will not talk to me,'' Mr. Fayed said. ''She thinks she's in the royal family.I'm just an ordinary guy, a working-class guy.It's snobbery.'' 
Mr. Fayed, an Egyptian citizen who also owns the Harrods department store in London, has been fighting for acceptance by the British establishment for years.
He has also encouraged speculation that the accident was somehow arranged by the British secret service to insure that Diana, as the mother of a potential heir to the British throne and head of the Church of England, would not marry his son, a Muslim.
Diana and Prince Charles, the eldest son of Queen Elizabeth II, were divorced before the accident. 
With conspiracy theories and denials swirling around England since the accident, Judge Stephan has been doggedly trying to determine who may indeed be guilty of a criminal act in the case: Mr. Paul, the photographers, the hotel management or perhaps the elusive driver of a white Fiat Uno supposedly brushed by the Mercedes just before the crash. 
Despite a nationwide investigation, neither car nor driver has ever turned up.
French law normally requires a reconstruction of a crime scene, but Judge Stephan has reportedly waived one so far because blocking traffic for hours at the accident site in a busy underpass beneath the Place de l'Alma, on the right bank of the Seine, would be impractical. 
Today's session was closed to the public and to reporters, but what little trickled out indicated that the inquiry was stuck at about the point where it has been since late last year. 
Various witnesses have said that Mr. Paul, the driver, was legally drunk but that the Ritz management and the passengers in the car did not realize it. 
The photographers have said they were too far behind the speeding car to have caused it to run out of control and have denied accusations that they were too busy snapping gory pictures of the scene to summon help for the victims. 
