Di and Dodi: Rumors and Mongers 
By SARAH LYALL 
Published: June 21, 1998 
LONDON DID a mysterious motorcyclist use a laser to blind the chauffeur in the car carrying Diana, Princess of Wales? 
Was the chauffeur's blood contaminated with lethal quantities of carbon monoxide? 
Was Diana murdered by the British secret service at the request of the Royal Family, her car rammed by a white Fiat, which ''disappeared'' at the hands of agents? 
Or did she and her lover, Dodi al-Fayed, fatally stumble into an underworld feud on their way to meet a drug dealer? 
And what about those shots fired from the grassy knoll?
(Whoops, wrong conspiracy.) 
Eight months have passed since the Princess of Wales died in what the French authorities have called a straightforward car crash.
But their flat assertions that it was merely an accident have only encouraged theorists, who are still busily inventing wacky stories.
Diana was pregnant!
No, she was snorting cocaine in the back of the Mercedes!
No, the Freemasons killed her, because the tunnel in which she died was decorated with ancient masonic symbols. 
The Secret Agent Agenda 
In Britain, some of the theories, which until recently have been simmering on the Internet and in the minds of dedicated conspiracists like Mr. al-Fayed's wealthy father, Mohamed, recently raised their strange little heads in the documentary ''Diana: Secrets Behind the Crash,'' which presented a mix of research and interviews. 
The program, which was broadcast on the ITV network earlier this month, reported that the chauffeur, Henri Paul, was a paid agent of the French secret service whose bank accounts mysteriously contained more than $160,000 -- even though he earned only $35,000 a year.
It also said that Mr. Paul had lethal levels of carbon monoxide in his blood, raising the possibilities that a) he was poisoned, or b) his blood sample was nefariously switched after his death. 
James Hewitt, the cavalry officer who was Diana's lover, came on to say that people he believed were connected to either the royal family or the secret service contacted him during their romance to warn him off, saying he would end up like a former bodyguard and confidant of the Princess who died in a suspicious motorcycle accident in 1988.
The mysterious callers made it clear, Mr. Hewitt said, that ''it was not conducive to my health to continue the relationship.'' 
Then there is Mr. al-Fayed, who owns Harrod's but has little credibility here, possibly because he argues that the accident was a plot to prevent Diana from marrying a Muslim.
Mr. al-Fayed has denied that Mr. Paul, one of his employees, was drunk, although his blood alcohol levels far exceeded the legal limit for driving.
Mr. al-Fayed has announced that he is ''99 percent certain'' it was not an accident at all. 
The documentary was greeted here with derision and incredulity.
''I think I'm living in a lunatic asylum,'' said Sir Bernard Ingham, former spokesman for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, during an ITV debate about the documentary. 
12 Million Viewers.
The controller of news and current affairs at ITV, Steven Anderson, brushed aside the criticism.
''If people are truly satisfied that this was a simple accident, why did 12 million people watch it?'' he asked. 
''The theories represent a sort of meeting of two needs,'' said Henry Porter, the London editor of Vanity Fair magazine.
''The first is the need to provide a spectacular and sensational martyrdom to match Diana's life.''
''The other is the need, in the case of Mohamed al-Fayed, to remove the blame from the Ritz and himself.'' 
''These two needs coalesce in a very useful sort of collaboration.''
''People just can not believe that she died in a drunk-driving accident.''
''It's too banal, it's too awful and in some ways it's just not believable.'' 
The Daily Mirror, which has mostly supported Mr. al-Fayed, asked its readers to call in to express their opinions.
Of the 9,877 callers, 94 percent said they believed the chauffeur was ''paid by the secret services.
'' The crash was not ''just an accident,'' 95 percent said. 
On the Internet, the theories are wilder, mushing together fantasies about a money and drug cartel controlled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Queen of England, the Rockefellers and the Rothschilds with -- ''The X-Files.'' 
''The conspirators were acting on papal orders and were financed by DuPont,'' declared one cyber conspiracist. 
Photo: The tunnel that launched a thousand conspiracists.
(Associated Press).
