Britain Bares Plans to Honor Diana, Irking Old Neighborhood.
By SARAH LYALL.
Published: June 25, 1998. 
LONDON June 24 As Britain braces for the first anniversary of the death of Diana, the Princess of Wales, the Government today announced a series of steps to commemorate her life. 
The plans, whittled down from more than 10,000 suggestions submitted to the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Committee, include a $:5 commemorative coin that would probably have Diana's likeness on one side and Queen Elizabeth's on the other, and a network of community nursing programs to help critically ill children.
Other plans call for an achievement award for schoolchildren; a memorial walkway linking Westminster Abbey, where Diana's funeral was held, to Kensington Palace, where she lived, and a 16-acre, $16 million landscaped memorial garden in Kensington Gardens. 
In announcing the proposals, Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown praised the ''time and effort'' that members of the public ''from all walks of life'' had put into drafting suggestions about how best to remember Diana, who died in a car accident last August. 
''The proposals which we have announced today were amongst the most popular and appropriate we received, and we expect them to be widely acknowledged as a fitting tribute to her life and work,'' said Mr. Brown, the chairman of the memorial committee.
Other committee members include Paul Burrell, Diana's butler; Anthony Julius, her divorce lawyer, and Earl Spencer, her brother. 
No sooner had Mr. Brown spoken than the garden plan was bitterly denounced by residents of Kensington, the London borough in which it would be built, who pointed out that the Princess had never been particularly interested in gardens or indeed in the outdoors.
Although Mr. Brown said that the plan was subject ''to consultation,'' the residents said they were terrified that the Government intended to go ahead with it anyway. 
''The idea of the people's princess has gone too far,'' said Jane Mayhew, a spokeswoman for the Kensington Society, a neighborhood group.''This is appeasing the great British public's appetite at the expense of a whole borough.'' 
And Sir Ronald Arculus, chairman of the Kensington Court Residents' Association, said the Government seemed obsessed with the garden plan.
''She did not much care for gardens herself, she was not interested in them,'' he said of Diana, ''and this one is a funereal thing. It's not appropriate.'' 
In the nearly 10 months since she died, there has been little sign in Britain that the public's obsession with Diana has begun to abate.
The newspapers still use any excuse to use her photograph on their front pages.
Every move the memorial committee has made, from approving the use of Diana's signature on a brand of margarine whose owners promised to donate their proceeds to charity, to publicly debating its own future, has been scrutinized and criticized. 
Althorp, the Princess's childhood home, is to open to the public next week, complete with a Diana museum, a cafe and a gift shop.
The multi-million-dollar refurbishment of the estate, which is owned by Earl Spencer, has been criticized by neighbors worried that it might become an English Graceland and by Diana-lovers concerned about the commercialization of her memory. 
The Earl himself, whose popularity soared when he rebuked the royal family at Diana's funeral and plummeted during his messy divorce and when it began to appear that he was cashing in on his sister's name, has sought to restore himself to public favor recently with a series of carefully selected interviews in the newspapers and on television.
And, as a member of Diana's memorial committee, he has been in the forefront of the country's exercise in keeping her memory very much alive. 
Among the suggestions the Government rejected, according to The Daily Mail, were a proposals to establish a new public holiday in Diana's memory, and to introduce a new medal that would have been awarded annually by the Queen. 
