Al Fayed to Sue U.S. to Obtain Files on Diana.
Published: August 31, 2000.
WASHINGTON, Aug. 30 Mohamed Al Fayed, owner of the Harrods department store of London, said today that he would sue the federal government seeking all information it has on the high-speed automobile accident that killed his son Emad Mohamed Al Fayed and Diana, Princess of Wales, three years ago in Paris. 
The suit, which Mr. Al Fayed said would be filed in Federal District Court here under the Freedom of Information Act, requests that several government departments and agencies -- including the National Security Agency, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Justice Department, the Department of Defense and the Federal Bureau of Investigation -- turn over documents, photographs and audiotapes related to the crash. 
Previous requests for documents from the federal government had been denied in the interest of national security, said Mr. Fayed's lawyer, Mark S. Zaid. 
''No one suspects that the U.S. government was involved in the deaths,'' Mr. Zaid said. ''What we accuse them of is withholding and hiding information.'' 
Diana and Mr. Fayed's son, who was known as Dodi, died on August 31, 1997, after leaving the Ritz Hotel in a chauffeured car.
Mr. Fayed owns the hotel and employed the driver, Henri Paul, who also died in the crash and was found to have had alcohol in his system. 
''There are still many unanswered questions, not least of which relate to documents held by the United States government,'' Mr. Fayed said. 
Mr. Fayed contends that through satellite systems the National Security Agency spied on Diana and his son, and passed the information to M.I.6, the British foreign intelligence service. 
Mr. Fayed further alleges that the Justice Department failed to investigate and prosecute individuals who tried to extort $20 million from him for C.I.A.
documents describing the involvement of M.I.6 in the accident.
Mr. Fayed has said his son and Diana were murdered by people who, controlled by ''a political regime,'' did not approve of their relationship. 
Mark Mansfield, a spokesman for the Central Intelligence Agency, declined to comment on the specifics of the suit because it has not been filed, and the agency has not had an opportunity to review it. 
