Judge to Decide on an Affidavit in Gun Lawsuit.
By JOSEPH P. FRIED.
Published: January 22, 1999. 
A Federal judge is expected to decide today whether criticism of the gun industry by a former gun company executive will be presented to a jury in a case that seeks to hold the industry liable for shootings with illegally obtained handguns. 
The former executive, Robert I. Hass, who until 1989 was a senior vice president of marketing and sales for the Smith & Wesson Corporation, the nation's largest handgun manufacturer, has charged in an affidavit and a deposition that gun makers and wholesalers do not do all they can to keep their products from falling into the hands of criminals. 
Mr. Hass charged that his former company, and the firearms industry as a whole, knew that the ''black market in firearms is not simply the result of stolen guns but is due to the seepage of guns into the illicit market from multiple thousands of unsupervised'' gun dealers. 
The plaintiffs in the case -- a lawsuit in which relatives of six people killed by illegally possessed handguns and a seventh person wounded by one -- are seeking in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to hold more than 40 gun makers and wholesalers, including Smith & Wesson, liable for the shootings. 
The plaintiffs contend that the companies have marketed and distributed handguns so negligently that dealers in states with weak gun control laws are oversupplied and that many of the excess guns end up with illicit traffickers who resell them to criminals in states with strong gun laws, like New York. 
The companies deny that they oversupply the states with weak gun laws and say they cooperate in every way they reasonably can to curb illegal gun trafficking. 
Lawyers for the plaintiffs had hoped to call Mr. Hass, who has been portrayed as a gun-industry whistle-blower, as a witness in the trial, but they say that a heart ailment prevents him from testifying and that they want his affidavit and deposition to be read to the jury.
Lawyers for the company oppose this, saying any testimony by Mr. Hass should be in person to allow for cross-examination in front of the jury. 
Anne G. Kimball, a lawyer for Smith & Wesson, also said yesterday that Mr. Hass's years at the company -- 1978 to 1989 -- were not ''within the relevant time frame'' of the case.
She said in an interview that under earlier rulings in the suit, the activities by the companies to be considered are those from 1989 to 1994, the last year in which any of the shootings in the case occurred. 
The plaintiffs' lawyers asserted that Mr. Hass's testimony remained relevant because the practices he described continued from 1989 to 1994.
Judge Jack B. Weinstein is expected to decide today whether his affidavit and deposition may be presented to the jurors. 
In his deposition, available since it was made last April, Mr. Hass said that one step gun manufacturers could take to keep their handguns from getting into the illicit underground trafficking market would be to use the information they got from law enforcement officials, regarding guns of theirs that might have been used in crime, to cut off retail dealers who have sold large numbers of such guns. 
