The Way We Live Now: 6-13-99: Encounter; Playing With Firearms.
By Jeffrey Goldberg.
Published: June 13, 1999.
'This,'' Tom Clancy said as he pulled a jet black semiautomatic rifle from his bedroom closet, ''is my home defense weapon.'' 
Clancy, who keeps his guns where most men keep their socks, handed over the HK G94 rifle.
''If somebody breaks into my house and comes upstairs,'' he said, ''it's going to be a bad career move. You can not miss with this.'' 
This is not true.
Shortly, in Clancy's basement shooting range -- Clancy keeps a shooting range where most people keep their washers and dryers -- I would miss with the HK G94. 
Clancy then took out a handgun.
''This is a fun weapon to shoot,'' he said, inspecting a Smith & Wesson Model 25 Long Colt.
He decided, however, to lay the revolver aside.
We would be firing strictly semiautomatic today. 
As we left the walk-in closet, strapped and ready to bust caps, Clancy's fiancee, Alexandra Llewellyn, happened by.
''You boys going to shoot?'' she said with a half-smirk.
Llewellyn is a second cousin of Colin Powell.
The obvious implication of this fact has drawn notice, to Clancy's consternation.
''Because I like guns I'm supposed to be in the [expletive] K.K.K.? '' he asked. 
Earlier, we had been sitting in his office, which overlooks the Chesapeake Bay -- perfectly idyllic except for the Navy helicopter buzzing the house.
''That happens all the time. You know, 'That's where Tom Clancy lives. ''' Clancy is the Ricky Martin of the United States military, and he returns the adulation.
Clancy's newest work, ''Every Man a Tiger,'' a nonfiction book written with Gen. Chuck Horner, retired, who commanded the allied air campaign against Iraq, has been on the New York Times best-seller list for three weeks. 
Tom Clancy is famously right-wing, and famously prickly, and today, as we armed ourselves, there was no way to know if he was being especially prickly or especially right-wing.
But this was the day after the Littleton shootings, and it was not turning into a good day for the N.R.A.
and its supporters, of whom Tom Clancy is among the most prominent.
''People are going to say, 'Oooooh, guns are bad, guns are bad. ''' He said this in a mincing tone of voice. ''Well, not one of my guns ever jumped out of my closet and killed someone.'' 
Clancy's audience today is not entirely unsympathetic.
When he asked me what weapon I would bring to shoot, I explained that I am a resident of D.C., where it is illegal to own handguns. I said that I thought this particular ban was illogical, since it has had no discernible impact on the city's crime rate. I endeared myself to Clancy by expressing this opinion, and he said he would even let me use his ammunition. But where should blame for Littleton be apportioned, then? ''Obviously, those kids' parents messed up somehow or other. Maybe they were genetically flawed.Maybe the best thing to do would be for the parents to join the N.R.A. and take a good gun-safety class. '' 
To give him the benefit of the doubt, sometimes Clancy says things merely to prove his anti-P.C.
bona fides, like when he uses the terms ''Hebes'' and ''Chinks.''  ''What these antigun screwballs want is a complete ban on weapons. The political left wants to impose its antigun esthetic on everyone else. If you're a homosexual, you're a hero to them. But if you like guns, you're a nut. Unfortunately for them, the Constitution stands in their way.'' 
We then decided to head downstairs to exercise our constitutional rights. 
Clancy's two-lane shooting range is a modern affair that cost him more than $200,000 to build, loose change to a man who probably sells $200,000 worth of books on Guam. 
He stepped up to the line first and, firing the HK G94 at a paper target, emptied the clip neatly, grouping his shots close together.
This was all the more impressive because Clancy's eyesight is so poor it kept him out of the Army.
Perhaps it was the pressure of competing against a half-blind shooter, but I did a lousy job with the HK G94 when it was my turn. 
I was not sighting the weapon properly, Clancy said.
Nor was my stance correct.
When I told him I was not completely new to this, he said, ''You were not trained by the best instructors in the F.B.I. like I was. '' 
One of the great benefits to being Tom Clancy is having the F.B.I.'s best instructors teach you how to shoot. 
''We had that dumb [expletive] Harrison Ford down here once, and these F.B.I.
guys even taught him how to shoot properly.
'' Hollywood's adaptations of his books -- and Harrison Ford's portrayal of his fictional hero Jack Ryan -- do not overly please him. ''He said, 'Hey, this really works. ' And then in the movie he was shooting like a dumb [expletive] again. '' 
We switched weapons, taking up a Beretta Model 92 9-millimeter handgun. 
Gun in hand, I asked him if thought the N.R.A.
might be unneccesarily maximalist in its approach to issues like waiting periods, background check and gun locks.
The N.R.A.'s extremism seems no more logical than the call for the complete banning of legal handgun sales, I suggested. 
''The problem is not gun control, it's crime control,'' Clancy said. ''If you look at the N.R.A. objectively, you see that they're fairly reasonable. The problem is not with the N.R.A. The problem is elsewhere.'' 
To my great relief, I matched Clancy on the Beretta.
''I have not shot in months,'' he said under his breath.
I thought to ask him if he felt his lax training schedule was putting his household in danger, but his weapon was loaded.
An armed society is a polite society, the N.R.A.
says, and it's true.
I shut up, and opened fire instead. 
Photo: (Claudio Vazquez for The New York Times) 
