Gun Maker's Accord on Curbs Brings Pressure From Industry.
By FOX BUTTERFIELD and RAYMOND HERNANDEZ.
Published: March 30, 2000.
Smith & Wesson, which recently agreed to restrictions on the way it makes and distributes handguns, has come under such fierce financial pressure from other firearms manufacturers and dealers opposed to the agreement that state officials have started antitrust investigations of the industry. 
Federal, state and city officials are also trying to protect Smith & Wesson by persuading police agencies nationwide to buy its weapons. 
The effort to help Smith & Wesson comes after the company agreed on March 17 to a wide array of restrictions.
In exchange, many of the 30 lawsuits filed against it by cities and counties will be ended and the company will avert threatened suits by the States of New York and Connecticut and the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Since then, one of the nation's largest gun wholesalers announced it would stop distributing Smith & Wesson handguns, many retail dealers have proclaimed they will not sell Smith & Wesson products and the National Rifle Association has denounced the company as a foreign-owned business that has ''run up the white flag of surrender'' to the Clinton administration.
Smith & Wesson, which experts say produces about one-fifth of the 2.5 million handguns sold nationwide each year, is based in Springfield, Mass., but is owned by Tomkins P.L.C. of London. 
In addition, Ken Jorgensen, a spokesman for Smith & Wesson, said the Chicago law firm that had long jointly represented Smith & Wesson, Sturm Ruger & Company and the Colt's Manufacturing Company, three of the largest handgun makers, has said the firm will drop Smith & Wesson as a client. 
And some shooting match organizers have told Smith & Wesson that the company is not welcome at their events. 
The Chicago law firm that informed Smith & Wesson it would no longer represent the company is Wildman, Harrold, Allen & Dixon.
Anne Kimball, a lawyer at the firm who has represented Smith & Wesson, did not return phone calls seeking comment. 
Eliot Spitzer, the attorney general of New York who helped strike the deal with Smith & Wesson, said that officials were investigating whether there was a conspiracy against the gun maker. 
''We are seeing behavior on the part of Smith & Wesson's competitors that raises the specter of illegal antitrust activity,'' Mr. Spitzer said in an interview today. ''This is serious stuff. '' 
Richard Blumenthal, the Connecticut attorney general who was also involved in the agreement and is helping coordinate the measures to protect the company, said, ''Smith & Wesson is under absolutely unprecedented pressure, both financial and personal within the gun industry, with threats that are almost violent in nature, and I have heard the fear that it could be put out of business.'' 
But Robert Delfay, president of the National Shooting Sports Foundation, the gun industry trade organization, said, ''There is no conspiracy'' against Smith & Wesson. 
''I could not be more confident that these are just independent actions by businessmen,'' Mr. Delfay said. 
The antitrust investigation is being conducted under state laws in New York, Connecticut and Maryland, with more states expected to join and subpoenas to be issued starting Thursday, Mr. Blumenthal said. 
Mr. Jorgensen, the Smith & Wesson spokesman, said it was too early to tell what the settlement's financial impact on the company would be.But, Mr. Jorgensen added, ''we've been getting beat up pretty bad, and the whole idea seems to be a boycott of Smith & Wesson products.'' 
Internet chat rooms devoted to guns have been filled with denunciations of Smith & Wesson, and Mr. Jorgensen said the company had been deluged with calls in opposition to its agreement.
He said the company had also received some supportive calls. 
The effort to get law-enforcement agencies to buy Smith & Wesson handguns could prove very helpful to the company, whose sales are primarily to civilians.
Nationwide, police forces buy about 25 percent of the handguns sold each year.
Only a very small part of the police handgun purchases are from Smith & Wesson. 
But Mr. Blumenthal and other federal, state and city officials who met in Washington on Tuesday to try to find a way to help the company acknowledged there were difficult contractual and legal problems in getting police forces to make the change to Smith & Wesson. 
Several cities and counties around the country, including Albany, Buffalo, Rochester, Atlanta, Detroit and Miami-Dade County, have recently agreed to buy only from Smith & Wesson.
New York City, which buys Glock handguns for its police officers, has withheld a decision. 
The effort to support Smith & Wesson is critical to regulating the firearms industry, government officials say, because the deal it struck splintered the powerful united front of gun makers and gun owners that has blocked tough gun laws for years.
The company agreed to improve the safety of its handguns, for instance, by including trigger locks with all sales, and to allow its dealers to sell weapons at only those gun shows where all sales are subject to background checks on the buyer.
It also requires, within three years, so-called smart-gun technology that will allow each of its new handguns to be fired only by authorized users. 
