3 More States Join an Investigation of Gun Industry.
By FOX BUTTERFIELD.
Published: April 6, 2000.
BOSTON, April 5 California, Florida and Massachusetts said today that they would join New York, Connecticut and Maryland in an antitrust investigation of the gun industry to determine whether firearms companies had conspired against Smith & Wesson, the nation's largest gun maker, after it agreed to restrictions on how it manufactures and distributes handguns. 
Richard Blumenthal, the Connecticut attorney general who is helping to coordinate the investigation, said that more states might join and that the states would work as ''a single team in what will be essentially a national investigation that can reach beyond any of our borders.'' 
Some subpoenas have already been issued, Mr. Blumenthal said, and a task force will begin interviewing witnesses soon. 
The joint action amounts to the first large-scale governmental inquiry into the industry after years in which gun makers, with backing from the National Rifle Association, have been able to avoid Congressional or state investigations. 
The antitrust investigation also comes as 30 cities and counties have filed lawsuits against gun manufacturers, wholesalers and retail dealers.
Some cases are expected to soon reach the discovery phase, during which lawyers for the municipalities hope to uncover documents showing the gun industry was aware that its sales practices helped make it easy for criminals and juveniles to buy handguns.
The suits against the gun makers charge them with failing to incorporate safety devices and negligently marketing their guns so that criminals can buy them. 
In the antitrust investigation, state officials will seek evidence that gun companies have colluded to bring pressure on Smith & Wesson, a unit of Tomkins P.L.C.
in Springfield, Mass., after it agreed on March 17 to broad restrictions in return for some of the cities' ending their suits against it. 
Since then, a Chicago law firm that handled many Smith & Wesson cases has said it will stop representing the company, a large wholesaler has said it will stop distributing Smith & Wesson guns, and some dealers have said they will no longer sell its products.
The question is whether these are independent actions or an organized effort to harm the company. 
The National Shooting Sports Foundation, the gun industry trade group, has insisted that the actions were spontaneous and independent and not part of a campaign. 
The states are acting under their own antitrust laws, which are modeled on national ones. 
