Giuliani Joins the War on Handgun Manufacturers.
By ERIC LIPTON.
Published: June 20, 2000.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, following the lead of many of the nation's other large cities, announced yesterday that his administration would file its own lawsuit against handgun manufacturers, seeking tens of millions of dollars to compensate New York City for injuries and other damage from illegal gun use. 
The lawsuit, to be filed today in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, comes after more than a year of questions from Mr. Giuliani's political rivals and gun control advocates about why New York City has hesitated to use its influence to try to force safety-related changes in the way handguns are designed and sold. 
Some Giuliani critics said that the mayor's departure from the Senate race last month might have been a factor in his decision to take on the industry, suggesting that he is now more willing to risk alienating prospective conservative donors. 
But Michael D. Hess, the administration's corporation counsel, said yesterday that politics had played no role.
The city had merely been studying some of the more than two dozen other lawsuits, three of which were thrown out of court, before moving ahead, he said. 
''This has nothing to do with the mayor running, not running,'' Mr. Hess said, instead citing the ''many, many unfortunately thousands of injuries and deaths that occur throughout the country from the illegal distribution of these guns.'' 
The city will argue that as a result of deceptive marketing, irresponsible supervision of gun sales and flaws in gun design, city residents are being killed and injured, and the city government has often had to pay medical bills in addition to law enforcement costs, Mr. Hess said. 
Lawrence G. Keane, general counsel for National Shooting Sports Foundation, a gun manufacturing trade group, said: ''The mayor's lawsuit will not save a single life or prevent a single crime from occurring. Short-term political needs have prevailed over the exercise of sound legal judgment on the part of the city.'' 
The Giuliani administration decided to include the nation's largest handgun maker, Smith & Wesson of Springfield, Mass., among the approximately 30 defendants, even though the company signed an agreement four months ago with the federal government and more than a dozen local governments to adopt some of the safety changes New York City is pursuing. 
The Smith & Wesson accord, heralded in March as a landmark in the gun control effort, has already shown signs of faltering.
Fewer cities than expected agreed to drop lawsuits against the company, and no other manufacturers have yet agreed to the conditions.
Some companies have indicated an intention to wait until after the presidential election, in the hope that George W. Bush, who is considered gun-friendly, will win. 
New York State's attorney general, Eliot L. Spitzer, while praising Mr. Giuliani for pursuing the matter, said yesterday that with Smith & Wesson included in the lawsuit, other manufacturers might now be even less willing to accept the accord. 
''It certainly does not create the appropriate incentive for other manufacturers to step forward,'' said Mr. Spitzer, who took part in the Smith & Wesson negotiations. 
Mr. Hess implied that the city was not entirely satisfied with the Smith & Wesson settlement, which included an agreement to install additional trigger locks on new handguns and to put a second, hidden set of serial numbers on all new guns to make it harder for criminals to remove identification marks.
But he said that the city was prepared to work quickly to try to settle that suit or others. 
''I do not think it is a complete answer,'' Mr. Hess said of the deal. ''All of the manufacturers are guilty of these charges, and if Smith & Wesson or anybody else wants to come in and try to settle the case early on by reforming their practices, we are available to do that.'' 
The case would be pursued in the same court where a jury last year found nine gun makers liable for shootings with illegally obtained handguns because marketing practices fostered gun trafficking.
Three companies were ordered to pay more than $520,000 to the family of a Queens teenager who was wounded with an illegally obtained handgun. 
Yesterday, several City Council members, while praising the mayor for joining 31 other local governments -- including Chicago, Detroit, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Boston and Philadelphia -- that have filed suits, asked why it had taken New York City so long.
New Orleans filed the first lawsuit in October 1998. 
''He clearly would have lost a lot of Republican support around the country if he had done this before,'' said Councilman Sheldon S. Leffler of Queens, a Democrat who is chairman of the public safety committee. ''That is no excuse. But it is better late than never.'' 
