Gay Man Beaten and Left for Dead; 2 Are Charged.
By JAMES BROOKE.
Published: October 10, 1998.
LARAMIE, Wyo., Oct. 9 At first, the passing bicyclist thought the crumpled form lashed to a ranch fence was a scarecrow.
But when he stopped, he found the burned, battered and nearly lifeless body of Matthew Shepard, an openly gay college student who had been tied to the fence 18 hours earlier. 
Today, Mr. Shepard, a 22-year-old University of Wyoming student, was in a coma in critical condition.
At the Albany County courthouse here, Russell A. Henderson, 21, and Aaron J. McKinney, 22, were arraigned on charges of kidnapping, aggravated robbery and attempted first-degree murder.
Two women described as friends of the men, Kristen Leann Price, 18, and Chastity Vera Pasley, 20, have been charged as accessories after the fact to attempted first-degree murder. 
Mr. Shepard's friends said he did not know his alleged tormentors.
The Laramie police say the primary motive was robbery, although court papers filed today indicate that Mr. Shepard's homosexuality may have been a factor.
Mr. Shepard's friends call the attack a hate crime. 
''He was very open about his sexuality,'' Tina LaBrie, an anthropology student here, said of her friend.''I admired him for that because it is very courageous to be yourself even when others disagree.'' 
A few hours before he was beaten, Mr. Shepard, who is 5 feet 2 inches tall, had attended a meeting of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgendered Association, said Walter T. Boulden, a friend of Mr. Shepard. ''He was sitting at the bar, having a beer, when two men came up and talked to him,'' Mr. Boulden, a 46-year-old university lecturer of social work here, said today between tears.
''He indicated he was gay, and they said they were gay, too.'' ''Now, he is in a coma,'' continued Mr. Boulden, who visited his friend at a hospital in Fort Collins, Colo., on Thursday.''I do not think anybody expects him to pull through.'' 
Mr. Shepard, who speaks Arabic and German, studied at a boarding school in Switzerland before returning to the United States to attend the University of Wyoming, the alma mater of his father, an oil rig safety inspector in Saudi Arabia.
He was born in Casper, the capital of Wyoming's oil belt, and spent much of his youth there. 
Six weeks after returning to Wyoming and enrolling as a freshman here, Mr. Shepard became depressed, said Ms. LaBrie and her husband, Phillip.
Accustomed to life in Europe and Denver, Mr. Shepard, a foreign language student who wanted to become a diplomat, found himself living in this isolated city of 27,000 people.
Set in a treeless landscape defined by barbed-wire fences, grazing cattle and a busy freight railroad line, Laramie is a town where pickup trucks outnumber sport utility vehicles, where fall entertainment revolves around this Saturday's homecoming football game and the start of the hunting season in the nearby mountains. 
Although Wyoming often bills itself as the ''equality state,'' the state Legislature has repeatedly voted down hate crime legislation on the ground that it would give homosexuals special rights. 
''Wyoming is not really gay friendly,'' Marv Johnson, executive director of the Wyoming chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, said from Cheyenne.''The best way to characterize that is by a comment a legislator made a few years back, when he likened homosexuals to gay bulls as worthless and should be sent to the packing plant.'' 
Mr. Shepard joined the campus gay association at the university within days.
One of his favorite haunts was the Fireside Bar, which drew a mixed crowd of college students and rodeo cowboys, gay and straight. 
''He definitely was not drunk when he came in,'' recalled the bartender, Matt Galloway.''He was not drunk when he went out.'' 
Calvin Rerucha, the County Attorney, charged in court documents today that Mr. McKinney and Mr. Henderson posed as homosexuals and lured Mr. Shepard out to Mr. McKinney's pickup truck just after midnight early Wednesday. 
Beating him inside the truck, the pair drove him one mile southeast to an isolated part of a new rural subdivision, the County Attorney's report said.
There, it said, the men tied their captive to a fence and pistol-whipped him with a .357 magnum handgun ''while he begged for his life.'' 
Relatives said that Mr. Shepard also suffered burns on his body. 
After nearly beating the young man to death, said the Laramie Police Commander, David O'Malley, the assailants stole his wallet and shoes and left him tied to the fence. 
Commander O'Malley said that when his officers arrested the two men on Thursday, they found in Mr. McKinney's pickup truck a .357 magnum pistol covered with blood and Mr. Shepard's shoes and credit card.
He said they found Mr. Shepard's wallet at Mr. McKinney's home. 
The police commander said that the two women helped the two men dump their bloody clothing, and that they reported hearing the men make anti-gay remarks.
Ms. Pasley, a freshman art student at the university, lived with Mr. Henderson.
Ms. Price lived with Mr. McKinney.
The police did not say what the other three did for a living. 
Today, friends and Laramie residents struggled to understand the incident. 
Mr. Shepard, some said, may have felt a false sense of confidence because the local Gay Association completed plans on Tuesday night for Gay Awareness Week 1998.
The weeklong series of events starts here Sunday with a local observance of National Coming Out Day and a lecture on Monday by Leslea Newman, the author of ''Heather Has Two Mommies,'' a book about lesbian families. 
''If I were a homosexual in Laramie, I would hang low, very low,'' said Carla Brown, manager of the Fireside.''Openly gay behavior is not only discouraged, it's dangerous.'' 
Photos: Kevin Lundahl, left, a Laramie, Wyo., police investigator, and Lieut.
Bob Volin of the Sheriff's Department searched the crime site on Thursday; Matthew Shepard, 22, left, was in a coma yesterday after being beaten.
Russell A. Henderson, 21, center, and Aaron J. McKinney, 22, were charged with kidnapping, aggravated robbery and attempted murder.
(Photographs by Associated Press) 
