After Beating of Gay Man, Town Looks at Its Attitudes.
By JAMES BROOKE.
Published: October 12, 1998. 
LARAMIE, Wyo., Oct. 11 As a gay college student lay hospitalized in critical condition after a severe beating here, this small city, which bills itself as ''Wyoming's hometown,'' wrestled with its attitudes toward gay men. 
On Saturday, at the University of Wyoming's annual homecoming parade, ''Pistol Pete'' and his uniformed brass band were overshadowed by the largest group of marchers: 450 people, many wearing yellow armbands and carrying signs in support of the student, Matthew Shepard, 21, who suffered severe head injuries in the attack last week. 
''Hate Is Not a Small Town Value -- No to Violence and Evil,'' read one sign, as watchers applauded.
With passers-by spontaneously joining the protest group, two women held another sign that read, ''No Hate Crimes in Wyoming.'' 
Two candlelight vigils were held tonight at churches near the campus.
At the Poudre Valley Hospital in Fort Collins, Colo., where Mr. Shepard's health continued to deteriorate, the hospital has received so many flowers that nurses have started to distribute bouquets to other patients.
A vigil at the hospital on Saturday evening drew about 500 people. 
''We live in the Equality State,'' Shannon Rexroat wrote on Friday in a special edition of The Branding Iron, the campus newspaper.
Referring to Wyoming's pioneer heritage as the first state to grant women the right to vote, Ms. Rexroat, the newspaper's editor added: ''That means nothing to me anymore.We live in a state where a young man was brutally beaten because he is gay.'' 
But others recalled today another side of ''Wyoming's hometown,'' which has a population of 27,000. 
On Friday, Jamie Lewis, another editor, was handing out copies of the special edition, when, ''One guy just put his hands up in the air and said to me, 'faggot-lover.' '' 
Last week's assault bubbled out of a climate of hostility toward gay men and lesbians, leaders of the local Unitarian church said in a letter published today in the city's newspaper, The Laramie Daily Boomerang. 
''This incident was atypical in its brutality, but not in its underlying motive,'' wrote Jeffrey A. Lockwood and Stephen M. Johnson.
Gay people in Laramie, they wrote, ''are frequently assaulted with derision, intolerance, insult and hostility -- if not guns and ropes.'' 
Ric Turley, who dropped out of college here after one year in the 1970's, recalled driving here to see his family for Christmas in 1993 and seeing a vandalized billboard on the main highway running north out of Colorado.
Under a brace of pistols, an advertising appeal for a state history museum had been changed he said, from ''Shoot a Day or Two,'' to ''Shoot a Gay or Two.'' 
Mr. Turley, who is gay, said he had complained to the museum.
But returning a month later, he found the message had not been erased.
After complaining to the museum again, he said he took a can of black spray paint and blotted out the word ''gay.'' 
''It was this kind of complacency and apathy that allowed this to happen,'' he said of the beating in which two local men, Russell Henderson and Aaron McKinney, have been charged.
Two women, Kristen L. Price and Chastity V. Pasley, have been charged as accessories after the fact to attempted first-degree murder. 
According to the local police and prosecutors, the two men lured Mr. Shepard out of a bar by saying they were gay.
Then, the Laramie police say, the pair kidnapped Mr. Shepard, pistol-whipped him with a .357 Magnum, and left him tied to a ranch fence for 18 hours until a passing bicyclist spotted Mr. Shepard, who was unconscious. 
Today, the Laramie police said that Mr. McKinney was arrested on Thursday at the same hospital in Fort Collins where Mr. Shepard was being treated.
Mr. McKinney was being treated for a ''minor'' skull fracture, unrelated to the fracas with Mr. Shepard, said Ben Fritzen, a Laramie Police detective. 
President Clinton has condemned the attack, saying on Saturday, ''I was deeply grieved by the act of violence perpetrated against Matthew Shepard.
'' Mr. Clinton urged Congress to pass the Federal Hate Crimes Prevention Act, saying, ''There is nothing more important to the future of this country than our standing together against intolerance, prejudice and violent bigotry.'' 
Wyoming is 1 of 10 states that does not have a hate crime law.
The latest attempt died in the Legislature in Cheyenne in February.
On Saturday, Gov.
Jim Geringer said he was ''outraged and sickened'' by the attack. 
In Laramie, Mr. McKinney's father, Bill, also condemned the attack.
But he complained about the attention by the national media. 
The national press ''blew it totally out of proportion because it involved a homosexual,'' Mr. McKinney was quoted as saying in an article on Sunday in The Denver Post.''Had this been a heterosexual these two boys decided to take out and rob, this never would have made the national news.'' 
Ms. Price, the girlfriend of Aaron McKinney and the mother of their 4-month-old son, Cameron, also was quoted in the article.
Ms. Price told The Post that her boyfriend had said that on Tuesday night Mr. Shepard made passes at him at a local bar, the Fireside. 
''He embarassed him and Russ in front of all their friends and everybody at the Fireside,'' said Ms. Price, who was not at her apartment here today.
''Later on, Aaron did say he told him he was gay just to rob him, because he wanted to take his money for embarrassing him.'' 
Ms. Price said that after the three men got in the pickup and drove for a mile, ''Aaron told him: 'Guess what? I'm not gay -- and you just got jacked.' '' 
Mr. Shepard grew up in Casper until his sophomore year in high school, when his father, an oil rig safety engineer, was transferred to Saudi Arabia.
The young man completed high school at a boarding school in Lugano, Switzerland. 
On Saturday, his parents, Dennis and Judy Shepard, released a statement thanking ''the American public for their kind thoughts.'' 
''He is a trusting person,'' the Shepards wrote.''He has always strongly felt that all people are the same, regardless of their sexual preference, race or religion.'' 
Photos: On Saturday, a candlelight vigil for Matthew Shepard was held at the hospital in Fort Collins, Colo., and marchers in a University of Wyoming parade in Laramie protested the beating.
(Photographs by Associated Press) 
