BRITAIN ARRESTS PINOCHET TO FACE CHARGES BY SPAIN. 
By CLIFFORD KRAUSS.
Published: October 18, 1998. 
Gen. Augusto Pinochet, who reigned over Chile as a dictator for 17 years and came to symbolize the excesses of military rule in Latin America, has been arrested in London after Spain asked that he be extradited for the presumed murders of hundreds of Chilean and Spanish citizens, the British authorities announced yesterday. 
General Pinochet, 82, who stepped down as Commander in Chief of the Chilean military seven months ago, was arrested by the British police on Friday night, little more than a week after he arrived in London for surgery on a herniated disc. 
The highly unusual arrest sets up what promises to be a legal struggle that could have wide implications for the prosecution of alleged human rights violators under international law.
It also appeared to break fresh ground in holding former leaders granted immunity in their own countries internationally accountable for human rights abuses committed during their rule. 
The arrest warrant said the general was wanted for questioning for ''crimes of genocide and terrorism that include murder.'' 
The Chilean Government immediately demanded General Pinochet's release, arguing that he has diplomatic immunity since he sits in the Chilean Senate.
But so far the British and Spanish authorities have shrugged off the Chilean protests. 
Britain's Interior Ministry said in London that the final judgment on whether to extradite General Pinochet lay with Jack Straw, the Home Secretary, who has up to 40 days to decide.
The British authorities refused to say where the general was being held; nor did they set a date for his questioning. 
In Chile, where the general took power with American backing after overthrowing the leftist Government of Salvador Allende Gossens in 1973, people were caught off guard and reaction was so far muted except for a few small demonstrations by Pinochet supporters. 
To this day, however, Chileans remain deeply divided over the Pinochet legacy.
Approximately a third of the country views him as a hero, another third views him as a villain, and the rest voice ambiguous opinions to pollsters. 
More than 3,000 Chileans were shot in the streets or ''disappeared'' during his rule, and a senior member of his Government was imprisoned under United States pressure for the murder of a former Foreign Minister, Orlando Letelier, in Washington in 1976. 
But General Pinochet also cast a long shadow in economic affairs, initiating a privatized social security system and other free-market policies that are still models from Argentina to Mexico.
Under a Constitution that he guided to enactment, the general was able to become a Senator for Life upon his retirement from the military, a position that afforded him continued political influence and immunity from prosecution. 
Relatives of people who disappeared and political opponents have filed lawsuits in Chile seeking to take away his immunity, but they are given little chance of success. 
A senior Spanish judicial official said yesterday that Judge Baltasar Garzon issued the international arrest warrant against General Pinochet on Friday after Interpol warned that the former dictator was about to be released from a hospital and would probably leave London. 
A British Foreign Office spokesman, who declined to be identified, said the general's arrest was ''a judicial matter, one for the police and the magistrates.'' But he added, ''One point that does fall to us: He does not have diplomatic immunity in this country.
'' The spokesman declined any further comment. An official who spoke on condition of anonymity said General Pinochet had been arrested ''at the direct, specific request of the Spanish authorities.'' 
Spanish lawyers said the request for his extradition had been sent to Scotland Yard through Interpol.
The request was based on the European Convention on Terrorism, which requires members to help one another in matters related to terrorism. 
In Britain, the request presented a quandary for the Labor Government of Tony Blair, whose party, while in the opposition, vocally criticized the Conservatives for allowing two previous visits by General Pinochet. 
On both occasions, in 1991 and 1995, when the Conservatives were in power, the general arrived with little publicity in his capacity as the head of the Chilean Army to meet with military contractors.
The Labor Party called the first visit ''appalling.'' 
Yesterday, however, Labor officials were reluctant to claim any credit and seemed caught between a commitment to honor election pledges and a desire to maintain good trade and diplomatic relations with Chile. 
Robin Cook, the Foreign Secretary, cast the detention as a purely judicial act resulting from the extradition request by Spain.
Indeed, the Foreign Office said, Mr. Cook told the Chilean Foreign Minister, Jose Miguel Insulza, that the arrest ''was entirely a judicial matter, and that the Government has no power to intervene.'' 
The initial arrest warrant was based on a single case of the kidnapping and disappearance of a Chilean leftist leader, Edgardo Henriquez, 35, in 1976.
The Spanish judicial official said Judge Garzon was planning to send to the British authorities on Monday the names of 78 other people of various nationalities who were also kidnapped in Chile and taken to Argentina, where they disappeared between 1976 and 1983. 
Judge Garzon has also demanded the extradition of various former Argentina junta rulers, but Argentina has refused to abide by warrants.
The focus of his investigation is the so-called Condor Plan, in which the military juntas of various Latin American countries allegedly collaborated to eliminate their enemies. 
Both President Eduardo Frei of Chile and President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina have resisted the Spanish legal motions, arguing that they infringe on their nations' sovereignty. 
Human rights and international law experts expressed enthusiastic support yesterday for the British arrest, and said it could have wide implications. 
Legal experts noted that since the Geneva Conventions signed after World War II, all countries theoretically have been obliged to take responsibility for crimes against humanity, thereby denying safe haven to promoters of international crimes like genocide.
Nevertheless, suspected war criminals, once granted amnesties in their own countries, have usually been safe from prosecution when they traveled abroad. 
But Ruth Wedgwood, a professor at Yale Law School, said: ''Extradition law has changed radically in the last 10 or 15 years.Torture and disappearances are considered such gross crimes that they are often held to be subject to international jurisdiction.'' 
''Extradition law used to have an exception for politicial crimes, for ordinary crimes motivated by politics,'' she added.''But if it is a gross violation of humanitarian standards, there's increased unwillingness to conclude that it was a political crime.'' 
Juan Garces, a Spanish lawyer representing 4,000 victims of the Pinochet rule, said the case against the general was based on international legal principles that there is no immunity for those responsible for crimes against humanity, even if they served as heads of state. 
Diane F. Orentlicher, a law professor and director of the War Crimes Research Office at American University in Washington, said the British and Spanish actions put ''teeth into the legal principle'' that perpetrators of crimes against humanity are international criminals.
''The central point of all of this is that crimes against humanity transcend the concerns of the countries where the abuses are committed,'' she said.''In theory, there should be no safe haven for world class criminals, but the central problem has been the enforcement of the law depends on the mobilization of the world's conscience.'' 
The Chilean Government said yesterday, however, that it would file a formal protest against General Pinochet's arrest.
President Frei, in remarks to reporters on Chilean television, said, ''We think they are violating diplomatic immunity.'' 
Photo: Gen. Augusto Pinochet of Chile, shown in a 1997 photograph, was arrested in London on Friday.
(Agence France-Presse)(pg.
12) 
