Arrest Raises New Issues On Tracking Rights Crimes.
By ALAN COWELL.
Published: October 19, 1998.
LONDON, Oct. 18 Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator arrested here at the request of a Spanish judge, remained sequestered under police guard today, awaiting a potentially devastating court hearing to weigh his extradition on charges of genocide, terrorism and murder. 
British officials have not said where General Pinochet is. 
Scores of Chilean emigres gathered today outside the upscale London Clinic, where the general, who is 82, had back surgery on Oct. 9.
The demonstrators demanded General Pinochet's extradition to Spain and held up photographs of some of the ''disappeared'' among the 3,000 people shot or abducted in his 17-year dictatorship, from 1973 to 1990. 
General Pinochet's detention on Friday has left the Labor Government of Prime Minister Tony Blair seemingly embarrassed by the diplomatic implications of an arrest that has enraged the Government of Chile, which Britain regards as an ally, and confronted European officials with uncomfortable implications for their handling of human rights violators from closer to home. 
''What goes for General Pinochet also goes for all the Mladics and Karadzics who are still in hiding and will be, one day or another, arrested and judged for their crimes,'' said the Foreign Minister Jacques Poos Luxembourg, referring to Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, Bosnian Serb leaders indicted on charges of war crimes by the the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague.
Both men have eluded arrest. 
Britain, however, seemed uncomfortable about turning the detention into a new crusade.
Neither Mr. Blair nor Foreign Secretary Robin Cook made public statements about the arrest, sheltering behind official statements that it was purely a ''judicial matter.'' 
In Washington, the spokesman for the State Department, James P. Rubin, said, ''We think this is a legal matter between the two countries.'' The United States has had no other comment.
The arrest has reopened a traditional divide between Labor and the Tories who, while in office until last year, regularly let General Pinochet enter Britain for medical treatment or to pursue arms deals with British contractors.
Mr. Blair's Government had been under strong pressure from Labor supporters and human rights groups to display its commitment to ethical foreign policies by acting against General Pinochet. 
Word of his presence produced an outcry in newspapers that generally support of Labor, as well as among Labor legislators.
In a television interview today Trade Minister Peter Mandelson termed General Pinochet a ''brutal dictator'' and said that his claim of diplomatic immunity against arrest ''for most people in this country would be pretty gut-wrenching stuff.'' 
But Michael Howard, a former Tory Interior Minister who took no action on General Pinochet's prior visits, said the arrest reflected the behavior of ''a very arrogant Government'' that might be ''displaying its utter contempt for our legal system and for the rule of law'' to appease a political constituency. 
General Pinochet was placed under arrest after a senior Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzon, had sent a request to detain him in connection with possible extradition hearings.
The arrest warrant says General Pinochet ''did murder Spanish citizens in Chile within the jurisdiction of the Government of Spain'' and was guilty of ''crimes of genocide and terrorism that includes murder.'' 
Judge Garzon and a colleague, Judge Manuel Garcia Castellon, are expected to travel here to question the general, possibly in a few days. 
Chile has protested the arrest, insisting that as a Senator for Life General Pinochet has diplomatic immunity under his diplomatic passport. 
A senior official in the Home Office, Alun Michael, said, ''A diplomatic passport does not, of course, guarantee diplomatic immunity.'' 
