Pinochet's Spanish Pursuer: Magistrate of Explosive Cases 
By MARLISE SIMONS 
Published: October 19, 1998 
PARIS, Oct. 18 A stubbornly independent judge who more than once has challenged the Spanish Government, Baltasar Garzon was ridiculed when he first set out to pursue the most notorious right-wing generals in South America for human rights crimes committed in the 1970's and 80's, offenses for which they had already been granted amnesty at home. 
Now, after Judge Garzon succeeded in getting Scotland Yard to arrest Chile's former dictator, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the Spanish magistrate has suddenly moved closer to creating an important legal precedent, one that could make the retirement of former dictators decidedly uncomfortable. 
While this is certainly his most spectacular strike, the 42-year-old Madrid judge has long been at the center of controversy.
Even before taking on the cases against former military rulers in Argentina as well as Chile, he had earned a high profile in Spain by investigating explosive issues, among them drug trafficking, Basque terrorism and government corruption. 
The judge, despite his professorial look, lives a tense life and has said he had to grow used to living with death threats.
He moves around with bodyguards and works under tight security in the offices of the Madrid special criminal tribunal, known as the National Court. 
His critics have often accused him of self-promotion because he takes on major cases and often appears on the front pages of newspapers.
But Judge Garzon, in a recent interview, responded that he is determined to expose crime in high places too easily overlooked and that in talking to the media he helps to prevent sensitive cases from being covered up. 
His involvement with South America began in 1996 when he opened a criminal investigation after several Spanish legal associations asked him to look into the torture, disappearance and killing of Spanish citizens in Argentina during that country's military rule from 1976 to 1983. 
''According to the law, these crimes must be investigated and hundreds of assassinations cannot remain unpunished,'' Judge Garzon said in an interview this year. ''Even the Spanish Senate denounced these crimes as state terrorism. But that did not result in anything.'' ''These are very grave violations,'' he went on.''We have a moral debt with the relatives of hundreds of victims.'' 
He did not respond to repeated attempts to reach him at private and business telephone numbers today. 
Judge Garzon, who works as an investigating magistrate rather than a judge on the bench, took more than five months to conclude that a Spanish court could have jurisdiction in the case.
He argued that under Spanish and international law, specifically under the Geneva Conventions, serious crimes involving human rights could be tried anywhere and were not subject to any time limit. 
He felt encouraged not only by support from international legal scholars and a United Nations committee, but also by the new efforts of Western powers to insure trials and punishment for those responsible for grave human rights violations in Rwanda and the Balkans. 
Soon, he brought charges against 110 former and active military and police officers in Argentina and issued international arrest warrants against at least 11 senior Argentine military officers, including a former President, Gen. Leopoldo Galtieri.
It meant that countries which are part of the Interpol agreement would have to arrest the officers if they traveled outside Argentina. 
Following the case against Argentina's security forces, another judge serving in the same court as Judge Garzon opened an investigation into the torture and killing of Spaniards in Chile during the 17-year Pinochet dictatorship, which ended in 1990.
Judge Garzon is now involved in both countries, and the cases have widened to embrace not just the killing of Spaniards but victims of other nationalities. 
Since the case against General Pinochet began at the National Court in Madrid, the United States has agreed to provide the Spanish judges with documents related to human rights violations during his rule.
The Madrid court has charged General Pinochet and other members of the Chilean High Command with crimes against humanity, including genocide and terrorism, involving the deaths of more than 4,000 people.
Both extraterritorial investigations have drawn scorn from the civilian Governments in Argentina and Chile, which have argued that the accused military officers have all been given amnesties and that no foreign judge can alter them. 
Spain's conservative Prime Minister, Jose Maria Aznar, has also told Buenos Aires and Santiago that he disapproves of the investigations, but that he cannot stop them.
He and other officials have complained that the judge's activities are complicating their diplomatic relations and risk affecting Madrid's strategy of expanding its business investments in Argentina and Chile.
But the judges have pressed forward. 
On Oct. 14, learning that General Pinochet had entered Britain for medical treatment, Judge Garzon asked the British judicial authorities to hold the former dictator until Spanish investigators could interrogate him about a series of crimes, particularly those committed under a so-called Operation Condor, in which Argentina and Chile cooperated in torturing and killing several hundred of their political opponents. 
The British authorities informed Judge Garzon that General Pinochet would be released from a hospital this weekend and that they could not legally detain him.
Judge Garzon then issued an arrest warrant against the general, specifically linking him to the case of a Chilean citizen, Edgardo Henriquez, who in April 1976 was kidnapped and tortured in Argentina and handed over to the Chilean secret police, then under General Pinochet's command.
He has been missing since. 
On Monday, Judge Garzon will reportedly broaden the arrest warrant by adding the names of close to 80 additional victims, who were also kidnapped in Argentina and handed over to the Chilean secret police as part of Operation Condor.
A lawyer familiar with the proceedings said Judge Garzon will also formalize his request that Britain extradite General Pinochet to Spain. 
But before it can be transmitted to the British authorities, the extradition request must be accepted by Spain's Ministry of Justice and then approved by Mr. Aznar and his Cabinet.
Mr. Aznar, who is known to prefer turning down the request, has given no clear indication yet of the outcome. 
Photo: Baltasar Garzon of Spain asked for the arrest of Chile's ex-dictator.
(Associated Press)(pg.A8) 
