Spain Widens Charges for Pinochet; He Signals He'll Fight Extradition.
By ALAN COWELL.
Published: October 20, 1998.
LONDON, Oct. 19— As a Spanish judge broadened genocide charges against him, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator detained here for extradition hearings, indicated today that he would resolutely oppose any attempt to try him in Madrid. 
General Pinochet's statement, made through his British lawyer, is the first response since his arrest on Friday.
It raised the question the length of the extradition hearings if the general's lawyers use every possible form of appeal, up to the House of Lords, to extend and challenge a process that in other recent cases has continued for up to two years. 
The surprising arrest as General Pinochet recovered from back surgery in a London clinic has stoked a feud between the Government and the opposition Conservatives.
Prime Minister Tony Blair's office insists that the detention was not a political act and the Conservatives accuse the Government of misusing the law to political ends. 
Most of all the case underscores the remarkable sea change in political culture after the election last year, when the Labor Party succeeded a Tory Government that took no action against the general on his many previous visits here. 
For General Pinochet, who once described Britain as ''the ideal place to live'' and who provided the nation with one of its few allies in the Falklands war, the late-night arrest represented an equally abrupt turnaround in the manner of the British authorities. 
''General Pinochet entered the United Kingdom with the full prior knowledge of Her Majesty's Government and with the approval of the Foreign Office,'' his lawyer, Michael Caplan, said in the statement.
''Upon his arrival he was treated as a V.I.P. Permission for him to enter and stay in this country was stamped in his diplomatic passport. Over recent years General Pinochet has traveled without hindrance to the U.K. on several occasions with the approval of Her Majesty's Government. '' Any attempt to extradite him from the United Kingdom will be resolutely opposed. Both he and his family are confident of success.'' 
Mr. Caplan would not answer a reporter's questions about whether General Pinochet would seek bail in the hearings or where he might be held.
He has been under police guard in the London Clinic. 
The Spanish judges who are seeking his extradition have 40 days from the time of his arrest to complete their formal request for the transfer. 
Britain rejects the argument that General Pinochet is protected by diplomatic immunity because he carries a diplomatic passport and is a Senator for Life, a position he created, in Chile. 
British officials also said weighing extradition would not be clouded by memories of the general's 17-year rule, during which his regime shot on the streets or abducted an estimated 3,000 people. 
General Pinochet came to power in the blood-stained takeover that toppled Dr. Salvador Allende Gossens, the left-wing leader who died in the coup.
General Pinochet relinquished power in 1990, shielded from prosecution in his own country. 
Home Secretary Jack Straw, who will ultimately make the decision on extradition, said today in a radio interview: ''Gen. Pinochet's record is well known. But so far as my position is concerned I will treat this extradition request by Spain in the same way as I treat any other extradition request.'' 
General Pinochet was initially detained on an international warrant that alleged that he had been involved in the murder, torture and genocide of 79 people.
The Spanish judge who led the campaign for arrest, Baltasar Garzon, said initially the victims whom he enumerated were all Spaniards whose cases fell under Spanish jurisdiction because of that country's genocide laws. 
Judge Garzon widened the accusation today, seeking General Pinochet's detention on charges of genocide, torture and terrorism relating to 94 people, including citizens of Argentina, Britain, Chile and the United States. 
''This widens the request for provisional unconditional imprisonment of Augusto Pinochet Ugarte for the reasons described in this resolution on crimes of genocide, terrorism and torture,'' the expanded warrant said. 
It accused General Pinochet of having ordered the ''physical elimination, torture, kidnapping and disappearances'' of citizens of other Latin American countries who were reported to have been handed over to the Chilean secret police from 1976 to 1983. 
Sharpening the crisis that has erupted over the general's detention, the Chilean Ambassador here, Mario Artaza, delivered a protest note to the Foreign Office today, saying that Chile did not recognize the jurisdiction of a Spanish court to try the general and wanted to protest his arrest. 
''We are trying,'' Mr. Artaza said, ''to protect our institutions and somebody who was traveling with a diplomatic passport and who is a senator in Chile.'' 
Photo: Judge Baltasar Garzon entering his Madrid courthouse yesterday.
(Associated Press) 
