New Actions On Pinochet Begin in Paris And Geneva.
By MARLISE SIMONS.
Published: October 27, 1998. 
PARIS, Oct. 26 As his lawyers in London tried to quash a Spanish arrest warrant for Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, efforts began in Geneva and Paris to have him extradited. 
In London, where General Pinochet has been under arrest in a clinic for the last 10 days, a phalanx of British lawyers argued before the High Court of Justice that the arrest order sent from Spain was illegal because the general, 82, is not a Spanish citizen.
They also maintained that as a former head of state, the general had diplomatic immunity for actions taken while in office. 
On the opposing side, Alun Jones, a British Government lawyer acting as prosecutor in the case, defended the Spanish warrant, which led to the general's detention in London.
The prosecutor argued that the right-wing general was responsible for killing at least 4,000 people and had set out ''to destroy a national group -- Chilean nationals who did not share his ideological values.'' 
After hearing the arguments in a court crowded with Chilean exiles, Lord Bingham, Britain's senior judge, said the court was expected to decide the matter on Tuesday. 
The Chilean Air Force has sent an ambulance plane to Britain in hope of the general's early release.
But efforts to prevent that gathered strength elsewhere in Europe. 
In Geneva, a public prosecutor, Bernard Bertossa, said today that he had issued a warrant for General Pinochet's arrest in connection with the kidnapping and presumed death of a Swiss-Chilean citizen in 1977. 
Mr. Bertossa said he had opened a judicial investigation in response to a complaint by the widow of the victim, Alexei Jaccard, who was 25 when he was tortured in Chile and subsequently disappeared. 
In Paris today, the families of three French citizens, of whom two disappeared and one was killed in Chile during the 1973-90 dictatorship, filed suit in a French court.
In addition, a human rights group in Paris said today that it had filed a suit with a Paris court on behalf of Anne Marie Pesle, whose father, Etienne Pesle, disappeared in Chile in 1973. 
In Madrid, Baltasar Garzon, the Spanish investigating magistrate who first obtained General Pinochet's arrest in London, said he had requested the Governments of Switzerland and Luxemburg to block bank accounts held by the general. 
In London, supporters and opponents of the dictator have traveled to the clinic where he is being held. 
From Chile have come six right-wing Senators, the Deputy Foreign Minister, aides and legal experts who file in and out of the private clinic in central London.
From Europe have come dozens of longtime opponents of the general who were forced into exile after his 1973 coup.
The exiles, along with others, stand daily outside the clinic holding up photographs of missing relatives and shouting anti-Pinochet slogans.
On occasion there have been shouting matches between the two sides. 
