Doctors in Louisville Perform Nation's First Hand Transplant.
By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN.
Published: January 26, 1999.
Surgeons in Louisville, Ky., performed the first hand transplant in the United States on Sunday, replacing the left hand of a New Jersey man with one taken from an unidentified donor who had died a few hours earlier. 
The 15-hour operation was performed at Louisville Jewish Hospital on Matthew David Scott, 37, of Absecon, N.J., who lost his hand in a fireworks accident in December 1985, hospital officials said. 
Mr. Scott's hand transplant is the third ever performed and the second within five months.
Clint Hallam, 48, of Australia is progressing surprisingly well after receiving a hand and forearm transplant in Lyons, France, last September.
Mr. Hallam is able to grasp a glass in his hand and drink from it, two of his doctors said in recent interviews. 
Mr. Scott's hand was reattached about two inches above the wrist by a team headed by Dr. Warren C. Breidenbach, a hand surgeon with Kleinert, Kutz and Associates Hand Care Center and assistant clinical professor of surgery at the University of Louisville.
Dr. Breidenbach rushed back from a meeting on immunology in Colorado when a donor hand suddenly became available. 
The family of the donor has asked that no information be given about the individual's identity, said Elizabeth Reed, the regional director for Kentucky Organ Donor Affiliates. 
''It was a very caring family who wanted to help,'' Ms. Reed said in an interview. 
Last night, Mr. Scott, who trains and supervises a team of 200 paramedics for Virtua Health, a hospital company based in Marlton, N.J., was reported sleepy but in stable condition after awakening from general anesthesia.
Mr. Scott is taking a combination of immunosuppressant drugs in standard use in heart, liver and kidney transplants to preserve the hand transplant.
His body has shown no signs of rejecting the hand. 
But ''there can be a lot of pitfalls along the way,'' Dr. Breidenbach said. 
A hospital spokesman described Mr. Scott, who is left-handed, as smiling and giving a thumbs-up signal with his right hand to indicate that he was not experiencing pain and was happy the operation was over.
His wife, Dawn, a nurse, was at his bedside. 
''He was conversing, and overall looked very good,'' said Dr. Jon W. Jones, one of the 17 surgeons, anesthesiologists and nurses involved in the operation. 
It will be some time before the Louisville doctors can say the transplant is a success.
Dr. Jones, a transplant surgeon, said in an interview that his team's animal experiments have shown that rejection reactions rarely occur before seven days and that 90 percent of the reactions occur in the first three months. 
If the grafted hand takes, weeks must pass before doctors can determine how well it functions, and Mr. Scott must undergo more than a year of physical and other therapy to gain full use of it, if that is possible. 
Doctors, ethicists and others do not share a unanimous view of the safety and merits of transplanting a hand or limb, because the hand is not essential for life and a recipient faces a lifetime of taking powerful and dangerous drugs.
Even if the transplant is successful, the recipient could develop infections, cancer and other serious illnesses that result in a shortened life. 
Approval for the Louisville operation was granted last June by two committees at the University of Louisville and Jewish Hospital that must sanction all experiments before they are carried out on a human.
Earlier, a leading medical ethicist, Dr. Mark Siegler of the University of Chicago, had deemed the hand transplant a justifiable experiment. 
A number of other experts have criticized the procedure as too risky. 
The first hand transplant was carried out in Ecuador in 1964.
It failed after two weeks when the recipient's body rejected the donor hand.
At the time only crude anti-rejection therapy was available. 
But the substantial improvement in immunosuppressive drug therapy that has occurred since then led a team of Australian, British, French and Italian doctors to give Mr. Hallam a new hand last September. 
The Louisville team had been planning a hand transplant for about three years and had discussed the technical, ethical and other issues at a number of scientific meetings and in journals. 
''My views have changed slowly as we've progressed through'' animal research and the ethics and science of hand transplantation, Dr. Breidenbach said in an interview. 
Last summer, the team used the Internet (www.handtransplant.com) to publicize its intent to perform a hand transplant, in order to alert possible recipients and would-be donors.
Mr. Scott read about their work in an article in The Times of London while on vacation in Britain, and contacted Dr. Breidenbach in July. 
Mr. Scott was chosen for the experiment, Dr. Breidenbach said, because he disliked his artificial hand, enjoyed strong family support and was intelligent and articulate. 
But the Louisville team was upstaged by the international team that performed the hand transplant in France.
The team had not signaled its intent to perform one, even at international scientific meetings to discuss hand transplants. 
Both the Louisville and Lyons transplant teams were startled to learn that Mr. Hallam was the patient in Lyons because he had also applied to the Louisville team for a hand transplant.
All were even more astonished to learn that Mr. Hallam, who had originally been described as ''a businessman living in Perth, Western Australia'' who had lost his hand in an industrial accident, turned out to have a criminal record.
He lost his hand in an accident in jail in New Zealand. 
Shortly after Mr. Hallam's transplant, the American Society for Surgery of the Hand joined critics of the procedure, saying that the risk-to-benefit ratio for experimental hand transplants ''has yet to be convincingly established.
'' The society urged that doctors not try another hand transplant until the success of Mr. Hallam's operation could be determined and further experimental work performed on animals. 
The Louisville team waited until mid-December to formally list a patient for a hand transplant with the regional tissue procurement agency, Dr. Breidenbach said. 
Meanwhile, Dr. Nadey Hakim of St. Mary's Hospital in London, one of the team of physicians who reattached Mr. Hallam's forearm, said he was ''quite surprised'' at Mr. Hallam's progress when he last examined him two weeks ago.
Mr. Hallam, who takes more than 30 pills a day, has not experienced a rejection reaction. 
Mr. Hallam's ability to move muscles in the hand and the fingers reflects nerve inputs at a level of his arm higher than where the new hand was joined to his amputated arm.
''But the fact that he's able to move them means that the muscles and tendons are obviously of good quality and have not rejected and are obviously having a very good blood supply,'' Dr. Hakim said. 
Dr. Hakim and Dr. Earl Owen, a microsurgeon in Sydney, Australia, who led Mr. Hallam's transplant operation, both said in separate interviews that the patient has gained 22 centimeters of nerve regeneration from the the attachment to the beginning of the palm. 
And though Mr. Hallam's fingers are numb and sensation has not been fully recovered, Dr. Hakim said, ''he's gotten a very strong grip.
'' To illustrate the point, Dr. Hakim recalled that on a visit to London, he and Mr. Hallam had visited a pub, and the patient ''picked up a pint of beer and took a few sips and drank it.'' 
Dr. Hakim said his team is considering doing a hand transplant in London within the next year. 
Mr. Scott's accident occurred as he held an M-80 firecracker with a fuse that burned faster than he expected.
It exploded before he could run out of a neighbor's house to throw it.
The use or possession of fireworks is illegal in New Jersey without a license. 
As far as Mr. Scott's long-term prospects are concerned, Dr. Breidenbach said that he had told all candidates for a hand transplant that there was ''a 50 percent probability that it will survive a year, and after that we just really do not know.'' 
