Man Puts New Hand to Test By Tossing Out First Pitch 
Published: April 13, 1999 
PHILADELPHIA, April 12— Matthew Scott was worried only about getting the ball over the plate when he threw out the first pitch today at the Philadelphia Phillies' home opener.
Never mind that he was throwing it with a left hand he did not have 11 weeks ago. 
''I threw a 'wishball,' '' Mr. Scott, beaming, said afterward.''I was really worried about muffing the throw, bouncing it, throwing it in the stands, or throwing it behind me.'' 
The 25-foot pitch was high and outside, but it was good enough for Mr. Scott, 37, of Absecon, N.J., who became the first person in the United States to receive a hand transplant during a 15-hour operation at Louisville Jewish Hospital in Kentucky on Jan. 25. 
Mr. Scott threw the ball with a protective glove that he wears every day as part of his recovery.
He cannot feel textures, like the seams of a baseball, with the new hand, but he can feel the pressure he applies on the ball. 
''This is a thrill, an absolute thrill,'' said Mr. Scott, who is left-handed. 
Mr. Scott, who had been using a prosthetic device since losing his hand in a 1985 fireworks accident, had said he wanted to play catch with his children after he recovered from the surgery.
Team officials decided to give Mr. Scott the opportunity to throw out the first pitch after hearing about his surgery and learning that he was a lifelong Phillies fan. 
Preparing for the game, which the Phillies lost, 8-6, to the Atlanta Braves, became part of his physical therapy.
''I kind of had to start from the beginning,'' he said.''For about 20 minutes to a half-hour a day, we practiced the motion of throwing and then the hand grip.'' 
Doctors say that Mr. Scott's therapy is progressing on schedule, and that his ability to throw a ball was a milestone. 
''He's worked hard for this,'' said Ann Hodges, a physical therapist who had traveled with Mr. Scott. 
Photo: Matthew Scott, of Absecon, N.J., the first American to undergo a hand transplant, wound up at the Phillies' home opener yesterday.
(Reuters) 
