It's Charlie Brown's Last Christmas.
By RICK LYMAN.
Published: December 15, 1999.
HOLLYWOOD, Dec. 14— You're on your own, Charlie Brown. 
After drawing more than 18,000 comic strips over a half-century about a pie-faced little loser who never got any smarter or any older, a boy whose best friends were grief and unease, who was regularly outsmarted by his own dog, Charles Schulz has decided to put down his pen and cut Charlie Brown some slack. 
''I have always wanted to be a cartoonist and I feel very blessed to have been able to do what I love for almost 50 years,'' Mr. Schulz said in an open letter that was released today from his home in Santa Rosa, Calif. ''That all of you have embraced Snoopy, Charlie Brown, Lucy and Linus and all the other 'Peanuts' characters has been a constant motivation for me.'' 
Mr. Schulz, 77, said that he would stop drawing immediately and that the final daily strip would run on Jan. 4.
The cartoonist was recently found to have colon cancer and said he needed to devote himself to fighting his illness. 
''Peanuts'' has appeared, with only one interruption, since it was introduced on Oct. 2, 1950.
Mr. Schulz drew every strip, taking time off only for his 70th birthday, a break of five weeks, said Diane Iselin, a spokeswoman for United Media, which syndicated the strip. 
''Peanuts'' appears in 2,600 newspapers in 75 countries and 21 languages, making it the most popular strip in the world, Ms. Iselin said. 
A social and marketing phenomenon that grew beyond the funny pages to become one of the cornerstones of postwar popular culture, ''Peanuts'' followed the angst-ridden exploits of a group of children in a nameless American suburb -- hapless Charlie Brown; his conniving dog, Snoopy; the sharp-tongued Lucy; her blanket-cuddling brother, Linus; the Beethoven-adoring Schroeder; Peppermint Patty, and Woodstock and all the others.
Adults never appeared in the strip. 
Mr. Schulz, the son of a barber in St. Paul, went by the nickname Sparky (for a character in the ''Barney Google'' comic strip), though he has described himself as shy and removed.
As a youth, he took a correspondence course in cartooning and earned a C-plus in ''Drawing of Children,'' according to the strip's official Web page, www.peanuts.com. 
''It seems beyond comprehension of people that someone can be born to draw comic strips,'' Mr. Schulz said in his official biography. ''But I think I was.My ambition from earliest memory was to produce a daily comic strip.'' 
After serving in the military in World War II, Mr. Schulz began to draw a comic strip for a local Roman Catholic newspaper and later joined the faculty of the correspondence school that he had once studied with.
One of his earliest characters was Charlie Brown.
After selling several single-panel comics to The Saturday Evening Post, he began a weekly single-panel comic in The St. Paul Pioneer Press called ''L'il Folks,'' which starred Charlie Brown. 
When an editor at the Universal Feature Syndicate suggested that Mr. Schulz expand to a strip format, the cartoonist signed a five-year contract.
But legal tangles forced him to change the name from ''L'il Folks'' (too close to ''L'il Abner'') to ''Peanuts,'' a name he hated. 
''Peanuts'' took several years to catch on in the crowded comic strip market.
But by 1952, it was popular enough that Rinehart & Company decided to take the unusual step of issuing a selection of the strips in a mass-market paperback. 
In 1961, a San Francisco housewife asked Mr. Schulz if she could create a ''Peanuts'' calendar, the beginning of more than three decades of marketing that has expanded to plush toys, games, books, stickers, videocassettes and other items -- and will continue even as the strip ends. 
There was a ''Peanuts'' musical on Broadway, several television specials (including the Emmy-winning ''Charlie Brown Christmas'' in 1965) and a hit 1966 recording (''Snoopy vs. the Red Baron'' by the Royal Guardsmen) that turned Charlie Brown's dog, deluded into thinking he was a World War I flying ace, into the strip's most popular character. 
Mr. Schulz recently underwent abdominal surgery, but was said to be back at home, recuperating. 
''It's a sad, sad time for us,'' Lorrie Myers, Mr. Schulz's secretary, told The Associated Press about the end of the strip. ''It has been such a part of our lives for 50 years. We've kind of grown up on Snoopy and Charlie Brown, and to see it come to a close is a sad time.'' 
Photo: Charles Schulz is to retire with his daily comic strip, ''Peanuts.'' (John Burgess/Press Democrat, via Associated Press) 
